Well hi everybody, let's get started then. Thank you so much for joining us today.
Welcome to the RStudio Enterprise Community Meetup. I'm Rachel, if I
haven't had a chance to meet you yet. I'm calling in from Boston, actually at the
RStudio office today. But if you've just joined now, feel free to introduce
yourselves through the chat window and say hello, maybe where you're calling in
from. I'd like to let everybody know up front, you can use the more button in
the zoom bar below to turn on live transcription if you wish. But just to go
through a brief agenda for today's meetup, so happy to have you all here.
We'll go through some short introductions of the meetup group and
we'll have Veerle here presenting on her experience optimizing shiny for
enterprise-grade apps. And we'll also have lots of time for questions. Veerle
said we can also ask questions during the middle of the presentation too, but
we'll have lots of time at the end as well. So for anybody who's joining this
group for the first time, this is a friendly and open meetup environment and
I'm sure everybody's heard this feel a bunch before, but for teams to share the
work they're doing within their organizations, teach lessons learned,
network with each other, and really just allow self to learn from each other. So
thank you all for making this a welcoming community. We really want to
create a space where everybody can participate and we can hear from
everyone. I always love to reiterate that we really love to hear from everyone no
matter your experience or the industry that you worked in as well. Just a quick
reminder that this session will be recorded and shared to YouTube for
anyone who missed it or if you want to go back and check it out again. So for
questions you can also use the Slido link which I'll put in the chat in just
a moment. So with that you can ask questions anonymously too if you don't
want to be part of the recording or you can put your name there and we can call
on you to jump in the conversation which is always fun too. But with all of that
thank you all so much for joining. I'm so excited to turn it over to you Virla
and I will mute myself here and turn it over to you. Okay hi welcome everybody
nice to see you all. I'm just closing down this presentation and move on to
mine. All right good to see you all. Today we're going to talk about
optimizing Shiny for enterprise-grade applications and what that exactly will
be. I will tell you all about it in a couple of minutes. So what are we going
to talk about today? So first I'll give a little bit of an introduction so that
you know who's talking to you. Also a bit about the company so that you have a
little bit of background on the kind of applications that we're making. Then I'm
going to dig into the content and we'll start with what happens before you start
coding. Then we're going to the coding part so how do you write code for an
enterprise-grade application. Then we'll talk about infrastructure, some tips and
tricks on how to optimize Shiny. Then we go over how to test your application and
the last part will be about monitoring your status of the application and usage.
So first I'll start by introducing myself. My name is Veerle. I'm a data
scientist. I graduated as a data scientist in 2015 already in the
Netherlands. That's also where I'm calling in from today. I did a master's
of data science and after that I started working as a data scientist at some
companies. Started off with an energy company then ended up in the
pharmaceutical industry at Dr. Reddy's. At a certain point in time I was like I
want to start my own business. I have so many ideas and I want to do things my
own way. So I found Hybrite which was a data science consultancy firm.
During all my nice assignments there I met my current business partner
Greg Mills with who I now run Analytic Health and I'm managing director and head
of data science there. I'm an R programmer. I love programming R. I build
Shiny applications and besides that I'm also doing a bit of JavaScript, building
applications in Vue and Node. So a bit more background about the company
Analytic Health. Who are we? At Analytic Health we develop tools and applications
for the UK healthcare sector. We try to accelerate innovation in healthcare by
giving companies the tools they need to access data and to get information from
that data. And in order to do that we have two applications. The first one is
Farmly Analytics and the second one is Farmly Cloud Data. Farmly Analytics is a
Shiny application as well as Farmly Cloud Data and with Farmly Cloud Data we are
also giving access to a Plumber API. So we do lots of stuff in R. We are a core
team of three people. It's myself, my business partner Greg Mills and our head
of operations Jana. And to start talking about enterprise-grade apps I want to
take you into what that exactly is. Because an enterprise-grade app can mean
many things for many of us and most of the people who hear enterprise-grade
think about oh this is an app serving thousands and thousands of users with
lots of servers behind it. They think big. And while that might be true for an
enterprise-grade app it's not the only thing that defines an enterprise-grade
app. So this is my view on what it actually means and what it means to us.
So for example the applications that we are giving access to our subscription
base and they are for the B2B market. That means that people pay for them. It's
not an open source app. Which also means that if obviously you are offering your
app through subscriptions that you need to have some kind of access control and
extra data security. Sometimes people or companies also provide their own data to
us which means that we need to have a high level of data security. And because
people and businesses rely upon our applications to make decisions on a
daily basis we need to have high availability, speed and there needs to be
data validation. So the data that we're using is healthcare data from the UK
that can mean that we have information about the prescriptions that have been
written, what prices are of medicines, what the clearance shortages are in the
UK etc. And obviously if you have this information this information needs to be
correct. So there are high data validation demands. On top of that what I
think distinguishes like a hobby shiny app from an enterprise-grade app is an
outstanding user experience. Which means that you need to put in considerable
thought on how the app behaves, what it looks like and what the overall feeling
is of the application. And an extra thing that comes with an enterprise-grade app
is support. Meaning that if people have questions they can come to you
immediately and that you provide this high level of support for your application.
So again enterprise-grade in my opinion has nothing to do with the number of
users, can be thousands of users, can be tens of users, can be 50, 100, doesn't
really matter. What qualifies for me as an enterprise-grade app is that you put
in considerable thought on the availability on the app and the
experience when people are using your application. And in fact I also want to
say that an enterprise shiny app shouldn't actually feel as a shiny app.
We sometimes get that comment from people who are seeing our app for the
first time and our shiny developers. They say oh this doesn't look like a shiny
app. But like I love shiny and I'm here to promote shiny definitely. But people
shouldn't see with what software the app was made. It needs to look like a good
app, good functioning app, high quality. So I see that as a compliment. So the
software behind it shouldn't really matter and it's the outcome that matters
in this case. So today I'm giving you kind of a sneak peek on how we manage
things and as I said we have two applications and I will take you along
with one of our applications which is Farmly Cloud Data. I will during my
presentation reference this app a couple of times to just give you examples on
how we do things with this certain app and how it works and what the
infrastructure is etc. So a bit more background about the application. The
application is kind of the data marketplace for the UK. You go into the
app, you choose the data set that you're interested in, you search for your active
ingredients or for your medicine brands that you're looking after and you can
download that data. It's not a complicated app meaning that there are
not machine learning models happening or that there are not complicated graphs or
something but the app is all about giving you an easy user interface to
access all the data that you need to make your decisions. Then there are a
couple of nice features there like you can add your own favorites and you can
monitor your usage of the app because behind this app is a Plumber API and the
Plumber API and our subscription based model works with a number of requests
meaning that people have a plan, a subscription plan and that kind of
determines how many requests they can make. So in the web app interface they
can also see how many requests they already have made and how many there are
still left in the month and you can fully customize the outcome of the data
set meaning that you can change column orders, that you can change settings, the
number of months you want to retrieve etc etc and you simply download that to
an Excel file. So that's a bit of background of the app that I will be
referencing a couple of times today. So let's first start not by going into the
code immediately but first with a very important and overlooked thing. The UI
first principle or user experience and user experience because one does not
simply succeed without a plan and often especially if there are a lot of data
scientists here today we think whoa I need to build an application let's code
but what we often forget is that we first need to think very carefully about
what the app is being used for, how people are going to use it, what it needs
to look like, where the buttons need to be etc and this is often an overlooked
part of building an application especially if you're coming from an
analyst background, a data scientist background whatsoever and this is not only true for a
Shiny application by the way but for any application you develop. So put some
considerable thought into how the application is going to work. We kind of
going back to my own experience at the beginning we were also exactly like that
we need to build this feature we're going to build it immediately went into
the code. Well that does lead to problems because as soon as you are going to
deploy your application then your users start seeing the feature then it's like
oh yeah maybe it wasn't working out as we thought in the beginning. So these are
all things you want to know upfront and UX designers can help you with that
perfectly because they exactly know how things should work and then you can see
it before you actually start. And obviously there are Shiny ways to make
this kind of a prototype and one Shiny way I want to highlight is the Shiny
Ibsen package. With the Shiny Ibsen package you can make this prototype in
Shiny yourself and while this does mean that you start kind of with the code it
is a bit different because here you can put in placeholders in your user
interface meaning that you can very easily set up an app and just say okay I
want to have here a table or a plot and some text and a button and then you can
kind of play it around with the user interface first before you actually
start writing the server code. So obviously the Shiny Ibsen package makes
a reference to the lorem ipsum dummy text. It's very easy to use and I would
definitely recommend it if you're looking for a quick way to prototype
your applications. So once you've done that you kind of know what your app is
going to be about, what it's going to look like, what it should do, you go into
code and that's the interesting part. But to build enterprise-grade
applications you also need to put in some considerable thought into how you're
going to manage that code and how you're going to build your application to scale
it. And this is something that we have learned over the years as well. We're a
startup company, we basically started with an app and then that grew and that
built and more customers came on it. So we learned over the years that it's very
important to if you have this massive app that can do a lot of stuff and that
grows over time that your code is maintainable and that you can work with
it. So how do you exactly make maintainable code because that's kind of
a magic thing. These are principles that are, well, not necessarily for Shiny but
for any app that you're developing in any software. It's important that you
write code which is easy to understand and debug, meaning that you think about
coding style, commenting your code, keep it stupid simple, the KISS principle. So
that is always easy to understand. You can choose to write really complex code
but that honestly never helped us because if you developed something very
complex with a very complex piece of code and then look at it a couple of
months later, you're like, I don't know what was actually happening here, some
magic. And it does give me the desired outcome, but you have no clue what is
actually going on there anymore. So keep it simple. We're also talking about
maintainable code, we're looking for an easy to modify and enhance code, meaning
that don't repeat yourself or dry principle, meaning that if you need to
make a change to your code, because let's say in our app, we're going to add
another data set, then obviously we don't want to do everything again. We
don't want to repeat our code. If we need to make changes need to happen fast
because we want to have new features out fast. So build your code like that you
can easily modify it. I'm going to talk a bit more about that later on and what
you can actually use and what we use to kind of don't repeat ourselves. Also
separation is key. And I remember when I started working as a data scientist at
Dr. Reddy's and had to build my first shiny app. And I was super proud of the
app because it had like, I don't know, 3000 lines of code in one script, which
was F dot R. And I was like, Whoa, this is a really cool app, so many lines of
code. Obviously, I didn't know what I knew now, obviously. Because separation,
splitting your code up into small, easily consumable parts is essential.
That app that I built in the early days, 3000 lines of code, not maintainable at
all. If I needed to find something, it could take me minutes or maybe half an
hour to actually search through code and make it all work. So what we do now at
Analytic Help is we separate basically every separate piece of functionality
into separate scripts. So that if also in separate directories, meaning that if we
need to find something or a specific piece that does this or that, that we can
easily find it. Also, we need to have code that's easy to test. And there comes
the automated units tests in place. If you have separated your code in like these
churns, it's also easier to test only that script for the desired outcome. And
I'll also talk a little bit more about that later when I'm talking about how to
functionize your code. Alright, so maintainable code, that's one thing. Then
how are you going to organize your Shiny app? And how are we doing that? We have
one way you can do it is Golem and the Almighty modules. Everybody talks about
modules, especially when you are talking about building enterprise apps, or
building apps for production, or as soon as you come into the territory of more
advanced Shiny apps, then there's no way to go around modules. And Golem is a
package that based Golem is a package that actually helps you to build your
Shiny application as a package. So Golem is basically a framework for building
your production grade Shiny application, it helps you to structure your code and
to organize it. And to basically be able to make your Shiny app as an R
package. If you have any experience with building R packages, it seems very
familiar to you. Because all the other things that you're used to of making
functions in your package are also here as well. So it's super easy to document
super easy to test. So coming back to how to build maintainable code, make sure
that you can test it. Golem kind of facilitates that. And obviously, because
if you can package it, you can also easily share it. So that's also a great
advantage. And it makes use of Shiny modules. So you hear a lot about modules.
But there's also another way that you can kind of manage or make maintainable
code. And that is functionalizing. I don't know if this is an actual word. But
what I mean with functionalizing your R code is basically that you build your
code up as functions. And this helps you to don't repeat yourself. Because if
you're making functions out of several server scripts, or UI parts, then you can
easily use those functions in other parts of the application. So coming back
to my app, farming cloud data, or our app, I should say, sorry, farming cloud
data. And we what we do there is we provide access to different data sets. So
let's say we have 10 data sets. And for those 10 data sets, you can kind of
request active ingredients and brands, and then you can download data, every tab
that's in that app does look kind of the same. So what we did here, instead of
using modules, for a variety of reasons, we chose to functionize the code, meaning
that if we now need to make an adjustment to, let's say, the download
button, we can very easily do so by just changing that function. And functions are
a fundamental unit of attraction in R, we use functions all the time, or build
around functions. So it's very helpful to do that, at least like that, to help you
to make your apps scalable. So what functions don't do is address the
namespaces problem, because that is what modules do. So when you're using
functions, you still need to make sure yourself that none of the input and
output names or IDs have a conflict with each other. Because in a shiny app, you
can't use the same IDs for inputs, or the same IDs for outputs, because then it
will just not work. So that is one downside of using functions. And yeah, as
I said, you can use modules, because they add this one extra level of
abstraction, and taking care of the namespaces problem. But functions will
already get you, well, good, as a good start. Then another thing, another
framework that I want to highlight today, and if you know me already, then you
might have seen this. But it's about a new package Rhino. Rhino is developed by
Epsilon. And it's also a framework that kind of promises to help you build
enterprise level shiny applications. So it kind of is similar to Golan, but
something different. What Rhino does, I think it was only released a couple of
weeks ago, what Rhino does is it helps you to have this kind of framework around
building your shiny app, and helping you with all kinds of best practices, and
giving you development tools. So it provides you with the basic structure of
a project, it provides you with a folder structure, files, kind of the same as
when you're using Golan. And it also provides tools to work with JavaScript
and SAS, for example. So this one uses box to modularize code, meaning what box
does, box basically makes our files, importable, as kind of modules, meaning
that you can just write an R script, and then can import it using box. And then
it works kind of the same as a module. So it's a bit different than the shiny
modules work. And it's definitely an interesting concept. So it's actually
also a little bit similar to chopping up like your big app.r script into multiple
R scripts, and then importing them in another way, box kind of take care of
that in a more clever way, so that you don't repeat yourself. Definitely worth
a look. And the other thing now is, okay, you've built your code, you have nice,
nice code, nice structure, it's maintainable, you have built your, your
kind of structure of your app using either Golan functions, Rhino, whatever
there is, then it's always a question, how are you going to bring that to your
users, you're going to use it. So a little bit about infrastructure and how
we do that. Obviously, there are 1000s of ways you can do it. And I'm not saying
that the way we did it is like the most ultimate way to do it. But for us, it
works very well. So these are my experiences, and our setup. And this is
our infrastructure. So I've kind of simplified it here, then how it is in the
real world, obviously. But our broad infrastructure, looking beyond shiny,
looks like this. Like, first, we get our data somewhere. And we get data from the
NHS, the National Health Service in the UK, then we do some stuff in R to
transform it, clean it, validate it, etc. Then we send it somewhere to be stored.
And we use bins and databases for that. If you're not familiar with bins, we
definitely read up about it. It's just a nice way to store any R objects. Once we
have our data somewhere, then we build tools around the data. As I said, we have
API's using Plumber, we have shiny applications, but we also do our markdown
reports and evil reports using the Stula. And then we deploy it. And we use RStudio
Connect for that. So our API's and our shiny apps are deployed on RStudio
Connect and are accessed from our customers outside of the organisation. You
don't hear that a lot with RStudio Connect, people actually do that. But you
can really nicely do that because you can also add your own branding to Connect,
meaning that it's also perfectly usable for outside customers if they want to
access your application in a safe way. Because as I said, it's important for us
that there is some access control, so kind of a login mechanism. And RStudio
Connect really takes care of that very well. So then we basically have our ETL,
our extract transform load, we have our apps, we have it deployed. And then
obviously around that is monitoring, we need to make sure that every step of the
process is being taken care of. Version control, meaning that we need to have,
for example, our API, customers are directly able to access data via the API
and can use the API in their own pipelines, dashboards, databases, etc. So
it's very important to have a version control on there. Because if you release
a new version and have breaking changes, what if the pipeline of the customer
depends on that. So there's this whole versioning control system around our
infrastructure. And then we also have a logging part, which I'm not going to go
into detail about, but we just make sure that we know what's happening in every
step of this process. And then if we zoom in a bit more to our infrastructure,
when it comes to our applications on Connect, we have a shiny app, which I
showed you farming cloud data. And actually, the server part of the shiny
app is not that interesting. Because what the shiny app does is it's making
requests to the plumber API. So basically, our back end is being written
as an API in plumber. This is not any different from, for example, writing few
applications or applications in JavaScript, because there you often have
front end and back end completely separated. Shiny brings them together.
But in this case, we kind of chose to also separate it here. So we have an API
that fetches the data from a database, in our case, databases in Azure. And the
plumber API, then does some processing to retrieve the correct data, whatever was
requested and sends it back to the application. The application server part
is then only about okay, make a request. And we're done with it. The other thing
that the shiny application does is making use of pins. So as I briefly
mentioned, pins are a way where you can store your objects. It's basically you
could kind of compare it to a database, it's not the same, but it's a place where
you store our related stuff. For example, data tables, models, objects, whatever
you want, really, you can pin it. And then you can use these pins to kind of source
your data into your application. So the shiny app, the only thing that's in the
server part is actually making requests to another app, or another API, making
requests to fetch some data, for example, what needs to be displayed in the
pickers. So what are the choices, which active ingredients can people select,
which brands can people select, etc. And the most of the shiny, the code is
actually the front end. And that's all being functionalized. So basically, we
have like a couple of functions for our whole user interface that provides kind
of 10 steps for 10 data sets and a dashboard and a favorite step, etc. So it
is deployed on RStudio Connect, we only have one server available that kind of
serves RStudio Connect, it's a good server and fits our needs. Obviously, if
you have a very large audience of let's say 1000s of users, you might want to
look into putting multiple servers, and then kind of load balancing across these
servers, which RStudio Connect is also capable of, but we just have one. And
what we kind of do to make sure that our apps are accessible, and fast is we have
always a couple of R processes running at minimum to serve these apps. For
example, for the plumber API, we have five processes always running and for
the shiny app also five, meaning that there are 10 processes, R processes,
always running to server applications so that people quickly can access the
application and do whatever they want there. And I will come back to that a
little bit about this process configuration and how these minimum
number of processes work. But this is kind of our base infrastructure, if I
really simplify it. And I can also give you that as the biggest tip, we've seen
a lot of benefits with using an API plumber API, instead of doing everything
in that one session in the shiny application itself. So kind of we
separated it, that makes it one more maintainable and two faster as well,
because we can kind of spread or load between what the app is doing on the
front end versus what is happening in the back end. And we can also do those
things in parallel. As I said, this is just one way how we do it. There are
obviously a bunch of alternatives. I'm not going into too much detail about it.
But just so you know, there are multiple solutions to to achieve
deployment of your application for for an enterprise. And one thing that you
can do, if your app grows bigger and has more traffic, you can add load
balancing and high availability using RStudio Connect, meaning that you kind
of configure RStudio Connect to be across multiple servers. And then
setting up an external shared file server that kind of then serves as the
where all the files are stored for RStudio Connect. And then you have a
lot of solutions with Docker, obviously, what kind of RStudio Connect does
under the hood, Docker is something that you can do separately to kind of ship
your application with this environment to a server, whatever server that may
be. And then your app is being run there. And Azure can be used for that
Azure App Service, but also any other cloud service provider really has these
these options to do that. And then there's also Shiny Server open source,
which is a fully open source solution where you can also which you can add to
one of your service if you want and serve your application from there. So
there are lots of alternatives. And I can talk for hours about how you can set
that up and how you can do that and going into the technicalities. But it is
just to give you a brief overview of what options there are, and that RStudio
Connect is one of them. So we've optimized, we did not optimize Shiny yet,
but we have deployed our application somewhere. So we've written a code, and
we've made it maintainable, we have built a structure, and we have thought
about user experience. So we've deployed it somewhere. So now it's time to go
look into a bit more detail into how we can optimize Shiny, to kind of make sure
that everybody who wants to access the application at a given point in time can
also do so. And the first thing I'm going to talk about with you is process
configuration. And I quickly touched upon this when I said that we always have
five R processes running for our Shiny app and for our Plumber API. Because, as
you might know, a Shiny app or a Plumber API requires an R process, meaning that
R needs to be up and running, and that needs to be ready to do stuff. And you
can configure these kind of settings. And these kind of settings that I
mentioned here, maximum processes, minimum processes, maximum connections
per process, load factor, you can set them in most cases yourself. So in
shinyapps.io, which is not an enterprise solution, but if you're still there,
these settings will also be there in RStudio Connect. And it's just very
important, also for if you are deploying your app in for any other cloud service
provider, it's important to understand how this works and how you are kind of
redirecting your users to an R process. Because a Shiny app requires an R
process. Okay, so then there is an R process in the Shiny app. And then
there's also a user. So a user can basically hop on to that R process. And
you can say, okay, I want to have only one user for our process, or I want to
have multiple and that is kind of going to determine your scalability of the
application. So things that you can tweak, for example, are the maximum
number of processes that you are allowing to run for your Shiny app. If
you said it's very high, let's say the maximum number of process can be 40, I
don't know, 50,000, whatever you choose. And it also means that it's more
resource consuming. Because the more R processes you have running on your
server, the more that server is going to be occupied with actually maintaining
and managing all those R processes. So you need to be a bit considerate here
about okay, how many processes do I really need? And am I potentially
overloading my server, the minimum number of processes is means you have, as
in our case, a minimum number of processes running for your Shiny app at
any point in time. So if you set this higher, let's say 10, 15, 15, it means
that you also consume more resources. Because all these processes are running,
they consume memory of your server. So the higher you set this, the more
resource consuming it will be. So you need to think about that. In our case,
we chose for five minimum processes. Because if we're looking at the number
of users that are coming at the simultaneous time to the app, and are
doing stuff, this is more than enough. But if you have the minimum number of
processes set, it means that there's always an R process running for your
application, meaning that the startup in time will increase drastically.
Because and that's kind of the downside of building a Shiny app, the R process
needs to be startup. So besides loading your app, it also needs to load an R
session. So together, that can take a lot of time and people don't like to
wait. And especially if you are building apps for a larger audience, apps that
people pay for, you have to have high expectations, people can't wait 40
seconds for the app to load, needs to be 10 seconds max. And if there's any
loading time at all, then it needs to be some kind of user friendly way of
loading with kind of spinners and waiters and whatever. But this is really
important for us to make sure that our app is fast. Also, when it's starting
up. Then you have the maximum connections per process, which means how
many users are you letting on to each R process. If you set this very low, it
means that, for example, in our case, we have set it to one. There's only one
user allowed per process, because otherwise, users have to wait for each
other. Because if one user is pushing a button to do a calculation, and the
other, then the session is basically occupied. And we all know when an R
session is occupied, then you can, you kind of can give an assignment or a
calculation, but R won't do anything until the previous one is executed. So
we've chosen to set our maximum connection per session per process to
one. But it really depends on how your app is working and what is best for you.
But the lower you set it, the less load there will be per process, but it will
also be more resource consuming. So we constantly see here already the kind of
the decision you need to make between how many resources do I want to invest
versus how dedicated do I want my processes to be. The last one is load
factor. That's a value between zero and one and the lower means that you spin up
many new processes. So you can also if you have the maximum number of
connections per process set to five, for example, five users can
simultaneously access your R session. If you set it very low, it means that as
soon as these people start hitting buttons and doing calculations and asking
things from the R session, that they get redirected to another process or that
the new process is being spun up to kind of handle that load. In our case, it
doesn't matter because we only have one connection per session. But it could
mean a lot. Like playing around with these settings can drastically change
the performance of your app. I remember from previous apps that I deployed using
either I think it was even called RStudio Shiny Server or something like
that back in the days. But you can see changes pretty soon when you are playing
around with these settings. So keep that in mind. So that's one thing that you can
optimize. But most of the game really is to be made in the app itself. So how are
you going to make your app fast? How are you going to make your app enjoyable?
Because that is part of building enterprise-grade apps. They need to work great.
People expect a lot from them. So smart coding. How are we going to speed up our
Shiny application? One way we can do that is by using cache. And cache is an
interesting way of kind of reducing the time it takes to get output. So imagine
that people can hit a button in your Shiny app. And once they hit that button,
there will be a very lengthy calculation running. I don't know. Maybe you have some
kind of machine learning model or something. But they choose one input. And the
calculation runs and it gets an output. It's obviously a shame if then a second user
comes in, chooses the exact same input, does the calculation again, and gets the exact
same output again. It's kind of a waste of time. Why should you do that calculation
twice? So this is where cache comes in. Because what you also can do is say, okay,
well, the first user requested a result for this input. Input A, we call it. We do that
lengthy calculation. Yes, it takes some time. But for the next ones, the next users,
we're not going to do that. No. Instead, we're going to immediately use the results that were
being cached from that calculation. So cache is basically a way of storing your output
somewhere, in this case, on your server or wherever you choose to store it. And then
retrieving it from storage instead of doing the calculation. So especially if you have a large
audience for your app, it can save a lot of time. And especially if a large audience is doing many
of the same things. And not only if you have a large audience, even if you have just one user
using your app, but it's constantly switching between input A, B, C, A, B, C, B again, C again.
It's kind of requesting constantly that same calculation because he's just shifting inputs
and he forgets kind of what the outcome of A was, so goes back again. So even for single users,
it can be very beneficial to just store these results. There are two ways you can implement
cache in Shiny. The first is the memoirs package, which kind of helps you to store functions
and the result of those functions as cache. And you have Shiny's bind cache function.
I have an example of both of them on my GitHub page, and I will share that afterwards.
So cache sounds nice, but a couple of disclaimers. It's obviously only useful when your output does
not change and does not change often. So let's say that your output changes, I don't know,
because there's a random seed in there or whatever. It changes every time, yet there's no point.
It also is not that much point if your data behind it changes like every, I don't know, six hours
or every day. It only is useful when it doesn't change regularly, so that is actually a point
of storing your output. Then the downside of using cache is that it requires space,
because obviously output needs to be stored somewhere, and that requires some space.
And you need to think about sensitive data as well, because if you are kind of sharing your
cached results with your other users, you need to think about, okay, is user A allowed to see
whatever user C did? Is that output for them the same? Is that something that they
both should be able to access? So that's something that you need to think about.
But cache can be a game changer in the performance of your app.
Another smart thing you can do is using background processes, and I touched upon it a bit by saying
that if you have multiple users per connection, that they have to wait for each other because
the session is occupied. Well, that sometimes can happen, and we don't want that, because we don't
want to have parallel execution. No, we want to have asynchronous execution of code, especially
if you're developing an app for multiple users. You want them to be able to do things at the same
time and not be affected. And in fact, you also don't want a user to have to wait while something
is being calculated and that he or she cannot do anything in the app. So let's say a user hits a
button to kind of render a graph, and then in the background, some data is being retrieved from the
database, and then calculations are being done, and then the graph is being rendered. Well, maybe the
user doesn't want to wait those, I don't know, 30 seconds for the graph to show up, but maybe in
between, the user wants to look at another table and maybe hit another button for a lighter
calculation or another calculation. You don't want people to wait. So this is where caller comes
into play, because with caller, you can spin a background R process. And this is really cool,
because your Shiny app is running on one R process, and then you can use the caller to kind of set up
an additional R process, do the calculations there, then fetch the result, and put it back into the
current R process. So this is especially useful if you have queries to databases, which take a very
long time. And this is actually the exact same thing that we do with our API, in fact, and our
Shiny app, because we actually let another R process do the work, retrieve the data from the
database, and then kind of send the results back. That's a similar principle to caller, only here
you do it in the Shiny app at the same time. And this is also useful, for example, when you are
starting up your application. So on startup, most often a bunch of data has to be loaded,
and you want to display graphs and tables and whatever. It might be useful if you just say,
okay, I'll just give it a little boost, and on startup, I'll spin up multiple processes
for my application. And it works really nice. Caller shuts itself down when the process is done,
and it's just a really nice and clean way to kind of put some extra resources to your Shiny app.
Then another thing about the API, how you can speed that up. Because as I said,
our app is about retrieving data from the API, displaying it, and making it available to
download. So in our case, it means the faster our API is, the faster our Shiny app is. Because
even though we are pulling in, I don't know, 100,000 lines of data whenever somebody makes
a request, we want that to happen in a split second. What we want to avoid is people have
to wait even 10 seconds for their data, because one of the selling points of our app is it's super
fast. So for us, it's very important that the API is fast, so the Shiny app can be fast.
And one of the real game changers for our app and our API was, is that we were going to use
Feather instead of JSON. Like a Plumber API, by default, returns JSON, but you can also let it
default to other data formats, for example, Feather. And we found that Feather is almost
two and a half times faster in comparison to JSON, and also the file size is being reduced.
Because we have to send data from the API to the app, the more data we have to send in terms
of size, the longer it's going to take. So by implementing Feather and sending it over as a
smaller Feather file, it was very, it took, it saved a lot of time to actually send that Feather
file instead of a JSON file. And in some cases, we were actually able to reduce API response time
by as much as 50%. And those are massive numbers. We're very happy that we've used Feather,
and you can use Feather in any situation. So let's say that you are reading in a file from disk,
for example, try to convert it to a Feather file, and then read it in as a Feather file.
And most often you are way faster, even with, even faster than like functions like app read
for reading a CSV and whatever. This is a really cool way to speed up your Shiny application.
All right. So I hope these kind of tips helped you to kind of have some ideas about how you can
improve your Shiny application, and how you can make your app faster, and how we did it.
So this was kind of the stuff that I wanted to talk about when it comes to coding.
Now I want to talk a bit about testing, because it's obviously very important that if you have an
app for like users, enterprise users, customers who are relying on a daily basis on the information
that you have in the application, you obviously want to test it. You want to test to make sure
that it can handle the load that you're giving it. And you want to be able to test
if it's working as expected anyway. So does your app every morning, do you know if it's running?
Or do you have to check yourself? How can you be sure that at any point in time your app
does what it is supposed to do? So first, we're going to take a look at the first question asked.
Is your app ready for the load that it's supposed to handle? So we need to test for load.
And testing for load we can do with a package called Shiny Load Test. And Shiny Load Test
provides the command line tool called Shiny Cannon. And because I find Shiny Cannon a lot
cooler than Shiny Load Test, I put that as the headline. And this basically can answer the
question for you, how many users can your Shiny app support? And it's really cool because the
only thing that you need to do is record your R session like you're a normal user. And then you
kind of let Shiny Load Test simulate all those recordings and replay them in parallel, meaning
that it can kind of simulate the situation in which multiple users at the same time are going
to access your app. And then after that, you can analyze the results. Shiny Load Test has a bunch
of convenient functions in there that allow you to analyze all the files that it generates. And
then you can build nice looking reports. And these reports can, for example, tell you the time it
takes to load the HTML home page or the time it takes to grab your CSS or JavaScript files
or the starting time of the session. So how long it actually takes before Shiny connects
to Socket.js. Also calculation time of, for example, any button that you press or any graph
that you try to render or table that you're going to display. And you also get a lot of details
about individual events. And a bunch of information is here. And this makes sure that you know,
OK, my app can safely handle this load. And then you need to see, OK, does it actually fit my
expectation of how many people are going to visit the app? Or do I need to change something?
It's also great to find out what is taking the most time and where you can get some efficiency
gains. So we test for load. Another thing that we want to test is test for outcome.
And testing for outcome means that we want to be sure that when somebody pushes a button,
that the outcome is what we expected. And we can test for outcome with the package called
ShinyTest2. It's actually the follow up of the package called ShinyTest. No surprises there.
And this package you can use to create and run automated tests. And behind the hood,
it uses TestStats. So what you kind of do here in this package is also you record,
just like Shiny load test, you record the session. And then you kind of replay it.
But in this case, ShinyTest2 will translate your actions into actual code. It's really cool. It's
like magic. But it will write actual unit tests for you using TestStats. So this allows you then
to kind of everybody talks about our units that are a pain, and they take a lot of effort,
there's so much time, and I don't have time to write them and always forget it.
This makes it super easy. I mean, it doesn't get easier than that. You just
play around in the app, you click a few things, and the code is there for you.
This package uses Chrome modes to launch a Chrome browser, a headless one. And it's
a really cool way to kind of make sure that your app is doing what it's supposed to do.
Plus, what the thing that's up to you, and it's your responsibility, is you need to update those
tests whenever you are making a deployment or whatsoever. If you don't update your tests,
then it's pretty useless. But it's a nice way to be confident about releasing your application with
a new update. Because unfortunately, when you change, and we all know that, when you change
somewhere in one part of the app, another thing might break. And this kind of prevents that.
So this is really key to make sure that you don't ship anything to production before it's really
good. So I'm moving on to the last part I want to tell you something about how to monitor app
performance and app usage. Because we've walked through the whole pipeline now, from like
designing, UX designing, to code, to optimizing Shiny, to deploying it, to testing your application,
like very high level. But then there's also the thing about, okay, how are you going to
monitor your app? And how are you going to know how many people are actually using your app?
And how we do that. So how we do that is with something I'm still very proud of every day,
our status reports. We have created status reports with Blastula and RStudio Connect,
meaning that every morning, or whenever we wish, we get a status report in our mailbox,
like this, looking like this. I even check in on my phone, it's like awesome. And it just tells me
exactly, okay, this is all good, or this is not good, or pay attention to this, these apps are
running, these URLs are accessible, this is the status of our services. And while there's a bunch
of stuff here that isn't necessarily related to Shiny, but more about our servers, it is important
for us to know our servers up and running. Because our apps run on those servers. And we want to make
sure that like every morning, everything is running as intended. So what we kind of do every
day is we check the disk space, because unfortunately, it happened once, and I'm sure I'm
not the only one, that the disk space was used 100%. And what happens then, then your server won't
do anything anymore. So your app is not working. But that's not cool. And also things like is the
engines configuration on, are the URLs accessible and stuff like that. It's a great way to kind of
monitor what's going on into your pipeline into your infrastructure. And it's just nice to get
it as an email so that you're always up to date. And I want to come back to Shiny Cannon,
because Shiny Cannon is not only useful for building these load tests and kind of see how
many users your Shiny app can support. But it's also a great way to kind of check if your app is
still behaving the same as yesterday. Because with Shiny Cannon, or Shiny load test, you recorded
something, a recording of you kind of replaying the app. And with the command line tool, so Shiny
Cannon, you can run this as a single recording. So you can use Shiny Cannon to do these load tests
with a number of workers and the load duration and kind of simulating 50 users at the same time.
But you can also use it to say, okay, I have a recording here, play it, and then give me the
results. And is it the same as expected? Then yes, thumbs up. If not, give a warning, in our case,
in one of our states reports. So this is also a great way to kind of automatically check if your
app is actually running and doing what it is supposed to do.
And then a little bit about usage. You need to make sure if you're building your application
for your customers, you need to make sure if you're actually using it and how much.
What we did, obviously, a very shiny way to do that, we build our own app, which we call
the console app. And in the console app, we can do a bunch of things. And one of those things is
checking usage of our apps, meaning that we can see how many times people logged in, who did log
in, how long were there for, what did they do, et cetera. This allows us to build us a better
product, but it also allows us to kind of check in with customers. Like, is everything still okay?
Can I help you with something? That kind of stuff. So even though we're a startup, we invested
a good amount of time into building these kinds of tools, because it's very important for us to
have insight into usage and insight into what's happening in our daily operations.
And then a very quick note about that you can also do this with RStudio Connect. We'll be very
familiar to Rachel, I think. You can use the API from RStudio Connect if you're using Connect to
deploy your apps. And you can get all these kinds of stats as well. Super easy to see who did log
in, who interacted with your content, which content is being viewed most, at which times of
day, and in which weeks, et cetera. So very important if you're building apps for an enterprise
level. And then I want to have a closing note with, can you build enterprise-grade apps with
Shiny? Yes, you definitely can. And I hope that today I showed you a little bit of how we manage
things. And I hope I gave you some tips and tricks to make enterprise-grade apps, or to optimize your
existing apps, or just learn you some general stuff about Shiny. And then now it's time for
questions. Amazing. I think there are some. There are lots of questions. Thank you so much
Birla. I always like to say we're all clapping. If you can't hear us, we can use our emojis.
Thank you, thank you. Thank you all so much for the great questions too. I see there's one that
was upvoted. That is, what's the benefit of using pins rather than pulling the data from your
database in Azure? Well, what we sometimes found is that pins are actually quicker than doing it
in our database. So we use pins to kind of store information that's subsetted. And while
you obviously can retrieve subsetted information from your database, a database needs to run a
query, needs to find the correct subset, can take a couple of seconds. And if the pin already
contains all the information you need, pre-processed, whatever, it's much quicker to do that.
Besides that, the data comes in the correct format already. So whether you stored it as a
data table or as a table with kind of the column formatting you want, so this column needs to be
an IDate or this column needs to be a character, whatever, that's all preserved. So it's a really
clean way to, in an R way, quickly retrieve information. And it obviously only does work
for subsetted or processed data. But we found this very, very beneficial.
Awesome. Thank you. And just a quick note, I'm not going to allow people to unmute today and
ask questions, which really stinks. I love to be able to have you all ask your own questions. I
just don't trust it right now. So if you do want to ask questions, you can use the Slido.
And so it's just, I'll put the link in the chat, or Jacqueline or Lauren, if you can share.
But it's just rstd.io meetup-questions. But another one was from Marcus.
Are there package license considerations you had to think about when monetizing
Shiny applications? Yes, definitely. Not all R packages are available for free, and you need
to have a license. Think about High Charter, for example, that requires an enterprise license.
You need to be aware of that. Yeah, definitely. Okay, cool. Thank you. Someone else asked,
do you find Rhino more easy to handle reactives? So, for example, passing them between modules
than gone? Interesting question. And I have to say, because it's a super new package,
I didn't have the time to go fully into it yet. I just kind of played around with the toy example.
So I can't really answer that question at this point in time. I hope it will be easier, because
I do see some advantages of using Box for modules compared to Shiny modules, because they just
work very differently. So, yeah, I'm very curious to explore it myself, too.
Awesome. I'm going to copy the questions over from Slido to the chat, too, just so we have
the timestamp of them when we go back to the recording. But do you use Promises to scale
the application? No, we didn't use Promises, but we are using Caller instead, because Promises
still wasn't providing us with a good solution to do whatever we want. Then we found Caller
more easy to use and also more clean. It cleans itself up pretty easily, while sometimes with
Promises, some stuff lingers around and keeps lingering around. And we didn't find those
issues with Caller. So that's why we use that instead. But it works the same as a Promise.
Caller is nothing more or less, except for a couple of benefits or maybe disadvantages,
compared to Promises. So, yeah, I hope that answers that. Great. Thank you. Sorry,
I'm just firing this away at you right now. Someone else was interested in Rhino and said,
for beginners with Shiny, would you recommend Golem or Rhino? Oh, that's a good question.
I don't know, for beginners. I'm actually tempted to say Rhino. I don't know why, but I do have a
feeling that, especially with the documentation they provided, it could be really a cool way to
set up your project. And for me, when I was looking at Rhino, it felt more intuitively
compared to Golem. If you have built R packages before, then I definitely think Golem would be
a good first step, because it sounds very familiar then to you. But if you don't have experience with
package building, maybe I would say pick Rhino and see what you can make of it. A little disclaimer,
Rhino is still super new and in development. So also the developers say there might be some
glitches here and there, obviously, teething issues. So that's just a little disclaimer.
But yeah, I would maybe say Rhino. Awesome. Another question that's just
being upvoted right now from David is, the myth is that only Python can be used
for production-grade apps. What made you choose to use R? Was it Shiny?
I chose R, like in university, back in the day as a scientist, I learned two programming languages,
R and Python, obviously. I stuck with R because I was mainly active in the pharmaceutical industry
and R is there just, it's more preferred above Python, probably because it's from where it's
coming from. I think it's definitely a myth that only Python can be used for production-grade apps.
Look, the language doesn't really matter. As I said, we built a Plumber API using R,
which is just R. We built an outstanding API that is being used in production pipelines for
other companies right now and nobody knows and nobody really cares. What people care about is,
okay, an API needs to be quick, it needs to deliver what I want it to do, like maybe the data,
and whether it's written in R, Python, JavaScript, Node, they don't really care. It just needs to be
up to standards and you can achieve that with R as well. Obviously, it's nice that,
because I knew R, that there was Shiny, so it was like the step was more easy to make,
to build a Shiny application. I learned a few end nodes later on in my career after Shiny,
but I must say, even though I have seen a few end nodes, we're still using Shiny for
enterprise-grade apps, just because there is a fast development.
It's fast to develop extra features for the app and the performance is just really good,
as long as you know how to use it and how to design it. That's why I said at the beginning,
some people said to me, oh, your app doesn't look like a Shiny app.
Yeah, but we build an app. How we build it should be irrelevant and we did this with Shiny, so
yeah, definitely admit that I'm ready to bust. I love it. Someone else asked,
is Feather strictly better than using JSON or what are the drawbacks?
It is strictly better. Well, I don't think you can always say it's 100% better in some use cases.
I'm sure it will be better than the other. For one thing, Feather, not everybody knows
how to deal with that. In our API as well, we've given our users the option, which output format
do you want to have returned? Do you want to have JSON or do you want to have Feather? Because
if our clients, it also depends on their end. Can they read in Feather files? Do they have
tools with that? Are they comfortable working with it, et cetera? But it's not really different.
It's just data that you are transferring and then you need to unpack it. We've seen,
especially file size reduction and speed reading it in, and in our case, that was better.
So yeah, that's all I can say about it. Thank you. I know we originally scheduled to
15 minutes past the hour, so I want to see if you have time for a few more questions.
Awesome. There is a great question I see that came in on Slido. Where do you see the line
between BI and Shiny for your use cases? What positives and or limitations would you say
about both? So just to clarify, what is meant with BI, like tools like Power BI and stuff?
Yes. I'm assuming like business intelligence tools like Tableau and Power BI.
Okay. Luke, if you want to build a simple standard dashboard with standard graphs and tables,
why not use Power BI if you have access to the tool and your team kind of knows it?
But as soon as you want to do custom things, you want to have a special graph. You want to
have special functionality. I mean, we wanted to have a favorite test. So people could actually
select their favorite products, and then that was being stored. It's being stored in the database,
and then the pickers kind of, they can make a choice. Do you want to see only your favorites?
Do you want to see everything? How are you going to do that in Power BI? Obviously,
if you want, you can do everything probably. But then for this level of customization,
I would say Shiny. So assume as you are looking at more customized features,
building things your own way, especially if you know how to leverage Shiny with custom JavaScript
and stuff, then the sky is the limit. And I would not choose for a standard,
in my eyes, a standard Power BI dashboard. And it's like, because it's a web app,
a Shiny is a web app, people can access it from wherever they are, whether they have access to
Power BI, yes or not. So it's, that's good. And like positives and limitations.
Yeah, I think I covered that. Yeah. Awesome. One other question was any tips,
advice or resources for enterprise grade UI development?
So interested to hear how you make an app look less like a Shiny app.
Yeah, good question. Like we have UX designers who occasionally design stuff for us and then
we just build it. What we did in some occasions was building HTML tools ourselves. So with the
HTML widget package, we build an own widget that kind of was a multi-page form. So we kind of,
we kind of built, if there's not a user interface component available in anything open source,
we just build it ourselves. But one package that greatly helps to instantly make your app
look better in a split second, bs4dash. bs4dash is awesome. It's a bootstrap based package.
And bs4dash basically turns your app within a matter of seconds into a good looking
app already. And then obviously you need to take care of like placement of stuff,
how you're going to display your graphs, et cetera. But bs4dash already gives you like the
basic layout for a great app, including like these little nice tools that you want to have,
like a dark mode, light mode, interactive components, a sidebar that kind of,
it goes away nicely, et cetera. Maximizing full screen, mobile friendly. So yeah, definitely.
Indeed, that bs4dash we should put in. Well, thank you. I just put that one in the chat too.
Okay. Let me just see. I'll go through just a few more questions here. But someone asked
anonymously, have you found a practical upper limit for users of a Shiny app above which
performance suffers? So is there like a certain number of users you've seen?
I don't think I've seen it like practically. We have like, I think, 70 users, but they're
never accessing the content at the same time. So I didn't experience those. But I actually can
kind of calculate how much we can handle because we have one server, which is RStudio Connect.
And because we only allow one connection per session, I kind of can calculate how many sessions
we can actually have. I think the kind of amount of simultaneous sessions we can have is like 50 or
something. And we have five running for each of our main apps. So five for the API from the cloud
data from the analytics of 15. So we have still an abundance of sessions that still can be used
and spun up without us running into problems. And if you do run into problems, it's not like
something breaks or explodes. No, your user just gets a friendly come back later or overloaded
message. So even that is not the end of the world. You want to prevent it, but yeah.
But it really depends on what machinery you put behind it. The bigger your machines,
the more servers, yeah, the more it can handle. Awesome. I've just shared one in the chat,
which originally just came to mind. It's the California state COVID dashboard. I know it
had thousands of users. It was open to millions of citizens. So there's a blog post on that one,
too. Okay. Let me go back over. Vikram asks, you recommended caching your pins to speed up apps
using data that doesn't change often. Any tips for more dynamic data?
So dynamic data. Well, maybe one tip I can give you, if you're talking about dynamic data,
often bring it from a database. Especially since we're a startup company, we basically
just started somewhere. We had a database, which was fine. As soon as we started looking into
optimizing the database as well, changing the number of cores, changing the availability there,
massive gains. So if you can pull data from a database and your database is fast enough and
organized well, because organization matters, where do you put your indexes? How are you going
to make sure that data can easily be retrieved? Then I would definitely look into that.
It's just whenever you're developing an app and you need to put in data, you always have to
ask yourself, do I really need everything of this data? If not, can I make it smaller?
And where does this data come from? And can I make wherever it came from faster? Yes or no?
So yeah. Thank you. So let's take time for two more questions. And if there's anything else
that we missed, if it's okay, if I send them over to you, maybe we can answer them through email.
Okay, cool. I see. Leonard just asked, thanks for a great presentation and meetup.
If you have time, I was wondering if you have ShinyCannon installed on the development machine
or on a server? So we have it installed on our Linux Ubuntu server.
Yeah. Great. So we have a development machine. Well, yeah, we have two servers,
one development server, one production server. I think this one was installed on our development
Linux server, yeah. Cool. Thank you. And then I see Mara asked,
I want to know if you could share some of the script testing of the Shiny project
in the presentation, but also, and thank you for this webinar. I don't know,
Virla, are you able to share any of this with the recording?
Yeah, well, I have actually here, this is my same, let's say, in touch slide. Go find me on LinkedIn.
I have here a bunch of resources of the things that I mentioned. I'm not sure if you mentioned,
if that answers your question. I can also share my GitHub username in the chat or Rachel can do that.
Or Rachel can do that. Yeah. I can actually, I can't chat. Can I chat? Well, I'm host.
You can as co-host. Yep. Yeah. So this is my GitHub username.
I have a couple of GIFs on there and open projects, which go over some of these topics.
For example, there are examples with color there. There are examples with Shiny options there.
With using tables, etc. There's probably, you can find some code there. Yeah.
Awesome. Yeah. I'll share these slides and then the links to all the resources
with the recording, which we'll put up on YouTube.
And then I'll share it on LinkedIn and Twitter or wherever I posted the meetup as well.
Yeah. Perfectly fine. Awesome. I just want to say thank you so much, Virla, for an amazing
presentation. I see a ton of great feedback coming through on Slido too,
because we're not using the chat. But a bunch of people saying this has been an excellent
presentation and really appreciate it. Oh, thank you. That's really nice to hear.
Yeah. Thank you all for joining. And yeah, let's stay in touch. If you have any questions,
you can reach out here to Rachel. And yeah, thank you. And thanks for the invite.
Yeah, definitely. Thank you so much. Have a great rest of the day, everybody. Bye, everyone.